'\" -*- coding: iso8859-1 -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH xvidcap-dbus-client 1 "23 May 2008" "May 2008" ""
.SH NAME
XVidCap D-BUS Client \- Remote Control Utility for XVidCap
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBxvidcap-dbus-client\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[--action start|stop|pause ]
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH INTRODUCTION
xvidcap-dbus-client is a small utility to allow for manipulating an
xvidcap capture session from outside xvidcap. Its main purpose is to be used from the command
line or key bindings.
.PP
For inter process communication this utility uses D-BUS. If xvidcap is not running when this
program is invoked to trigger an action, xvidcap is started through D-BUS activation. 
For help, feature requests, or bug-reports please turn to http://www.sourceforge.net/projects/xvidcap/
.SH OPTIONS
This program follows the usual GNU command line syntax, 
with long options starting with two dashes (\*(T<\-\-\*(T>). 
A summary of options is included below.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-action \fR\*(T>start|stop|pause
This sends a command to xvidcap to either start or stop a capturing session or
to pause or resume one. If xvidcap is not running it will be started.
.SH AUTHORS
xvidcap-dbus-client was written by Karl H. Beckers.
.PP
This manual page was written by Karl H. Beckers <\*(T<karl.h.beckers@gmx.net\*(T>> for 
the xvidcap project.
.PP
This translation was done by TRANSLATOR-CREDITS HERE!!!
.PP
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under 
the terms of the GNU Free Documentation 
License, Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free 
Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover 
Texts and no Back-Cover Texts.
