'\" -*- coding: iso8859-1 -*-
.if \n(.g .ds T< \\FC
.if \n(.g .ds T> \\F[\n[.fam]]
.de URL
\\$2 \(la\\$1\(ra\\$3
..
.if \n(.g .mso www.tmac
.TH xvidcap 1 "23 May 2008" "May 2008" ""
.SH NAME
XVidCap \- Record X11 screen portions to video
.SH SYNOPSIS
'nh
.fi
.ad l
\fBxvidcap\fR \kx
.if (\nx>(\n(.l/2)) .nr x (\n(.l/5)
'in \n(.iu+\nxu
[-v] [ --mf | --sf ] [--file \fIfile name pattern\fR |- ] [--fps \fIframes per second\fR] [--cap_geometry \fIgeometry\fR] [--rescale \fIsize percentage\fR] [--quality \fIquality percentage\fR] [--source x11|shm ] [--time \fImaximum duration in seconds\fR] [--frames \fImaximum frames\fR] [--start_no \fIinitial frame number\fR] [--continue yes|no ] [--gui yes|no ] [--auto] [--codec \fIvideo codec\fR] [--codec-help] [--format \fIoutput file format\fR] [--format-help] [--audio yes|no ] [--aucodec \fIaudio codec\fR] [--aucodec-help] [--audio_in \fIaudio capture device\fR |- ] [--audio_bits \fIaudio bit rate\fR] [--audio_rate \fIaudio sample rate\fR] [--audio_channels \fIaudio channels\fR]
'in \n(.iu-\nxu
.ad b
'hy
.SH INTRODUCTION
xvidcap is a tool that captures movement on a selected area of an X11
screen to files. It can operate in two distinct modes: (1) \fIsingle-frame\fR
capture or (2) \fImulti-frame\fR capture. In single-frame capture mode 
xvidcap takes a configurable number of screenshots per second and 
saves them to individual files. In multi-frame capture mode xvidcap 
also takes a number of screenshots per second, but encodes them to a single video in real time. 
Audio capture is only available with multi-frame formats.
.PP
Recording in single-frame capture mode may be more convenient if you wish to preprocess the 
images before encoding, or if you need other video codecs xvidcap 
does not support. Individual images can later be encoded with tools like ffmpeg, mencoder, 
or transcode.
.PP
For help, feature requests, or bug-reports please turn to http://www.sourceforge.net/projects/xvidcap/
.SH OPTIONS
This program follows the usual GNU command line syntax, 
with long options starting with two dashes (\*(T<\-\-\*(T>). 
A summary of options is included below.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-v\fR\*(T>
Runs xvidcap in verbose mode. This will provide more information about
user settings, input and output codecs, performance and so forth. Messages
like \(oq"missing XX milli secs .."\(cq while capturing mean you are missing 
frames due to lack of ressources (dropped frames). This results in a video 
that will play back too quickly. Note though, that verbose mode slows down 
xvidcap and may actually be \fIcausing\fR frame drops. Try running without 
verbose mode and watch the frame drop monitor.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-mf\fR\*(T> | \*(T<\fB\-\-sf\fR\*(T>
xvidcap tries to be smart about what capture mode you want. If you 
specify \*(T<\-\-file test.avi\*(T> xvidcap will assume you want multi-frame capture.
You can explicitly specify capture mode on the command line with this
switch. If, for example, you have your settings properly configured and
saved with multi-frame capture as the default mode, calling \*(T<xvidcap \-\-sf\*(T>
will start xvidcap in single-frame capture mode with all stored settings. The
default is multi-frame capture.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-file \fR\*(T>\fIfile name pattern\fR
File name or pattern to use for saving the captured frames. A file name
pattern contains printf()-like formatting (ref. \*(T<man printf\*(T>) 
information to make the file name incrementable, e.g. \*(T<\-\-file out\-%02d.xwd\*(T>. 
This is necessary for single-frame capture. xvidcap will 
replace the first printf() format string with the number of the frame currently captured. 
Thus, in the example given, it will write to files \*(T<\fIout\-00.xwd\fR\*(T>, 
\*(T<\fIout\-01.xwd\fR\*(T>, \*(T<\fIout\-02.xwd\fR\*(T>,
etc. The frame number to start with can be specified with \*(T<\-\-start_no\*(T>,
see above.

Multi-frame capture does not need a file pattern. If you specify one
nonetheless like \*(T<\-\-file mymovie\-%d.mpeg\*(T> for example, xvidcap
will replace the format string with the number of the current recording session 
(always starting the count from zero). This will enable you to manually in-/decrement that
number, or use the autocontinue feature (ref. \*(T<\-\-continue\*(T> below) effectively
creating a series of video files.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-fps \fR\*(T>\fIframes per second\fR
Specifies the number of frames to be captured per second. This parameter 
accepts floating point values, which allows for very low capture rates like
e.g. \*(T<\-\-fps 0.5\*(T> to record one frame every 2 seconds. This is only possible
in single-frame mode. Codecs used for multi-frame modes usually only
accept certain frame rates as valid. Note that fractional frame rates for 
codecs like MPEG1 which only accept very specific fractions are disabled 
in this version due to an inconsistency with fractional timing between 
xvidcap and libavcodec. Only integer frames rates will be accepted here.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-cap_geometry \fR\*(T>\fIgeometry\fR
Specify the geometry as for e. g. xterm, i. e. like this:
\fIwidth\fRx\fIheight\fR+\fIx-position\fR+\fIy-position\fR

This overrides the default width and height of the capture frame. Use the picker
button of the GUI rather than this command line option to adjust the frame size to a 
given window. Capture sizes below 20 x 20 don't seem to work well with 
most multi-frame capture codecs.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-rescale \fR\*(T>\fIsize percentage\fR
Rescale the output to a percentage of the original input. A value of \*(T<25\*(T>, e. g.
makes the output size be 25 percent of the original input area. Rescaling does not work with XWD
output.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-quality \fR\*(T>\fIquality percentage\fR
Specify a value between \*(T<0\*(T> and \*(T<100\*(T> to define the quality encoding. The 
default value is \*(T<90\*(T>. Note that the effect of a value below \*(T<100\*(T> has changed in version
1.1.5.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-source \fR\*(T>x11|shm
Enable or disable the usage of the X11 shared memory extension. For shared 
memory support both client and server have to run on the same host. If shared
memory support is available, xvidcap will use it by default. If your X server and
client do not run on the same machine, you need to disable it by passing \*(T<\-\-source x11\*(T>.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-time \fR\*(T>\fImaximum duration in seconds\fR
Specifies the maximum time to capture, a value of \*(T<0\*(T> will cause xvidcap to capture until 
stopped interactively. For any other value any recording session will
stop automatically after the specified number of seconds. This parameter 
conflicts with \*(T<\-\-frames\*(T> (see below). If both are given xvidcap will stop capturing
when either applies. The program accepts floating point values, e.g. \*(T<2.5\*(T>.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-frames \fR\*(T>\fImaximum frames\fR
Stops capturing after the specified number of frames are captured. If \*(T<0\*(T>
xvidcap will capture until stopped interactively, ref. \*(T<\-\-time\*(T> above.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-start_no \fR\*(T>\fIinitial frame number\fR
Defines the start number which should be used for numbering files. The default 
value is \*(T<0\*(T>.This parameter is used for single-frame capture only.
The numbering of movie files for \*(T<\-\-continue\*(T> always starts at zero.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-continue \fR\*(T>yes|no
When multi-frame capture is selected, maximum recording time or frames are
specified, and the output filename is incrementable (see \*(T<\-\-file\*(T> below),
xvidcap can automatically continue to capture to a new file when one 
exceeds the maximum recording time or number of frames. This will change
the behaviour of \*(T<\-\-time\*(T> and \*(T<\-\-frames\*(T> because recording will not stop
at the specified limits, but rather start a new video file. The feature is 
esp. useful if you want to automatically split your recording into chunks of
e. g. five minutes. If no argument \*(T<\-\-continue\*(T> is given, xvidcap defaults to \*(T<no\*(T>.
Because single-frame capture needs an incrementable filename to count the
individual frames, this feature is disabled for single-frame capture. 
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-gui \fR\*(T>yes|no
Start xvidcap with or without control GUI overriding what's in the
preferences file. Running without GUI will automatically start a single
capture session. It can be stopped by either specifying one of \*(T<\-\-time\*(T> or
\*(T<\-\-frames\*(T>, or by hitting CTRL-C.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-auto\fR\*(T>
xvidcap supports automatic detection of parameters for
output format, video- and audio codec. If any of those settings are saved as fixed
values in the stored preferences, they can be overriden by specifying the parameter
\*(T<auto\*(T> to any of the arguments \*(T<\-\-format\*(T>, \*(T<\-\-codec\*(T>,
or \*(T<\-\-aucodec\*(T>. This argument is a shorthand for setting all three to
automatic detection.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-codec \fR\*(T>\fIvideo codec\fR
Override preferences and automatic codec selection with the explicitly
specified codec.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-codec\-help\fR\*(T>
List valid codecs.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-format \fR\*(T>\fIoutput file format\fR
Override preferences and automatic format selection with the explicitly
specified file format.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-format\-help\fR\*(T>
List valid file formats.
.SH "AUDIO OPTIONS"
The following options relate to audio capture which is available with
multi-frame output formats only. There audio streams can either be captured 
from a compatible audio device (e.g. \*(T<\fI/dev/dsp\fR\*(T>) or from 
STDIN (ref. \*(T<\-\-audio_in\*(T> below).
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-audio \fR\*(T>yes|no
Enable or disable audio capture using default parameters or those saved to the
preferences file. If supported this is enabled by default for multi-frame capture.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-aucodec \fR\*(T>\fIaudio codec\fR
Override preferences and automatic codec selection with the explicitly
specified audio codec.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-aucodec\-help\fR\*(T>
List valid audio codecs.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-audio_in \fR\*(T>\fIaudio capture device\fR\*(T<\fB|\-\fR\*(T>
Capture audio from the specified device or from stdin. The latter allows
for dubbing a captured video using a command line like the following. The 
default is \*(T<\fI/dev/dsp\fR\*(T>.

\fBcat some.mp3 | xvidcap --audio_in -\fR
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-audio_bits \fR\*(T>\fIaudio bit rate\fR
Set the desired bit rate. The default is \*(T<64000\*(T> bit. Note that when using
STDIN input the input file will be resampled as needed.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-audio_rate \fR\*(T>\fIaudio sample rate\fR
Set the desired sample rate. The default is \*(T<44100\*(T> Hz. Note that when using
STDIN input the input file will be resampled as needed.
.TP 
\*(T<\fB\-\-audio_channels \fR\*(T>\fIaudio channels\fR
Set the desired number of channels. The default is \*(T<2\*(T> for stereo. Any value
above \*(T<2\*(T> is probably only useful with STDIN input and a 5-channel AC audio
input file or very good and rare recording equipment.
.SH AUTHORS
xvidcap was written by Rasca Gmelch and Karl H. Beckers.
.PP
This manual page was written by Karl H. Beckers <\*(T<karl.h.beckers@gmx.net\*(T>> for 
the xvidcap project.
.PP
This translation was done by TRANSLATOR-CREDITS HERE!!!
.PP
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under 
the terms of the GNU Free Documentation 
License, Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free 
Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover 
Texts and no Back-Cover Texts.
